---
title: 06. Word Classes: Determiners, Prepositions, Conjunctions, Negation
layout: default
nav_order: 2
---

## 06. Word Classes: Determiners, Prepositions, Conjunctions, Negation

### Exam 1 Announcement
- Exam 1 will be on next Tuesday (February 18). The exam will be closed-book. Please bring a pen, and let me know if you need any accommodation. 
- This Thursday (February 13) will be an optional review session. You are allowed to skip this session if you're confident!
- In the review session, we will go over the Exam 1's from 2024 Spring and Fall semester.
  - [Exam 1 from Spring 2024](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1X0PXfwmWRgZuipLDzqtR8X2dVDgvGXp8/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=105452858281062359965&rtpof=true&sd=true)
    - [w/ answers](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KW42kNB5s7srwg8kHzcJFEJQmqo3rXus/edit?usp=sharing&ouid=105452858281062359965&rtpof=true&sd=true)
  - [Exam 1 from Fall 2024](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1fwPtMG6ziB0jcx0WS0FoStBsiA4WrGD9c1Wyg8ZWFEo/edit?usp=sharing)
    - [w/ answers](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1RGaPKmMonpZ4TPJVVBBjTFkBFWnkOZXa2DwkDFCQUBE/edit?usp=sharing)

### Objectives for this lesson
- Identify the word classes of determiners, prepositions, and conjunctions
- Understand the distinction between definite and indefinite articles, numerals, possessives, quantity words, and demonstratives
- Differentiate between coordinating, subordinating, and correlative conjunctions
  
### Review: Major/Content/Open vs. Minor/Function/Closed word classes
- Major class words = Content words
  - Noun (_castle_)
  - Verb (_decide_)
  - Adjective (_happy_)
  - Adverb (_beautifully_)
      
- Minor class words = Function words
  - Pronoun (_their_)
  - Determiner (_the_)
  - Auxiliary (_will_)
  - Preposition (_across_)
  - Conjunction (_and_)
  - Particle (break _up_)

### Determiners
- Signalers of nouns
- Including:
  - Articles: (_the_ = definite, _a_/_an_ = indefinite)
  - Numerals (_one_, _twelve_, _first_, _third_, etc.)
  - Quantities (_more_, _all_, _another_, _any_, _no_, etc.)
  - Possessives (_his_, _my_, etc.)
  - Demonstratives (_this_, _that_, _these_, _those_)
 - Every determiner has to be followed by a noun phrase.

### Exercise: Determiners
Identify all the determiners in each sentence, along with their type.
1. Our teacher has had enough of this nonsense!
2. The news has caused some drama.
3. Every time a bell rings, an angel gets its wings.
4. I haven’t responded to any message; no apology is necessary.

### Prepositions
- “Pre-position” (before a nominal)
- Including
  - Simple Prepositions (_against_ the wall, _out_ the door, _with_ my best friend)
  - Complex (_according to_ the textbook, _along with_ empirical evidence, _in back of_ the building)

### Exercise: Prepositions
Identify the prepositions in the following sentences:
1. I	have	been	impressed	with	his	style	since	I	met	him.
2. According	to	some	reports,	millennials aren’t	saving	enough	for	retirement.
3. I	haven’t	played	tennis	in	ten	years,	thanks	to	a	shoulder	injury.
4. Some	don’t	want	to	eat	carbs	after	8pm.
5. They	are	working	toward	a	solution	to	the	problem	of	icy	campus	sidewalks.

### Particles (vs. preposition)
- Particles are _part_ of a multi-word verb
- Usually changes the meaning of the verb (_throw_ vs. _throw up_).

#### Negative particle
- I am going to the store.
- I am __not__ going to the store.

### Exercise: Are they particles?
1.	I	woke	_up_ early.
2.	She	climbed	_up_ the	stairs.
3.	Throw	your	hands	_up_!
  
<details>
  <summary>👆 Click me</summary>
1. particle; 2. preposition; 3. adverb
</details>

### Conjunctions (Coordinating, Subordinating, Correlative)
Conjunctions connect words, phrases and clauses inside a sentence. They also connect sentences.

#### Coordinating conjunctions 
- “co”
- a conjunction placed between words, phrases, clauses, or sentences of equal rank
  
**Exercise:** Identify the conjunctions and their functions (what do they connect?)
  
- Riley and Tim worked out on Saturday.
- I'll meet you at the ticket window or in the grandstand.
- The dessert was simple yet elegant.
- Kris packed the car and drove away from the familiar house on Maxwell Avenue.
- I disapproved of his betting on the horses, and I told him so. He claims to have won fifty dollars, but I suspect he's exaggerating.

#### Correlative conjunctions
- conjunctions that are meant to be used in pairs; they correlate in order to make connections and provide equal importance to the points.
  - either ... or ...
  - neither ... nor ...
  - not only ... but also ...
  - both ... and ...

#### Subordinating conjunctions
- sub- = under, subsidiary
- connects or shows a relationship between “unequal” ideas
- main clause + dependent/subordinate clause
  
**Time**: when, whenever, after, as, before, once, since, till, until, now that, while, as long as, as soon as  
**Concession**: though, although, even though, if, while  
**Contingency**: if, once  
**Condition**: if, in case, as long as, unless, provided that  
**Reason**: because, since, as long as  
**Result**: so that  
**Comparison**: as, just as, as if  
**Contrast**: while, whereas  

### Exercise: Prepositions or Subordinating Conjunctions?
1. __Before__ the show, seniors and students line up outside the box office.
2. __Since__ some orchestra seats remain unsold at most performances, the opera company sells a small number of them to seniors and students for a low price.
3. Rush tickets have been offered for sale __since__ the beginning of the year, but not everyone knows about them.
4. Ticket sellers often tell older and younger people about the rush __before__ they sell them tickets at full price.
5. Rush tickets go on sale 90 minutes __before__ the performance, and sales continue __until__ all the rush tickets have been sold.
6. Any student or senior who arrives __after__ that has to pay full price.
7. __After__ they buy their tickets, students and seniors have along wait __until__ curtain time.

### Quizzes:
[Quiz: Determiners](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001776)  
[Quiz: Prepositions](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001777)  
[Quiz: Conjunctions](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001778)  
