---
title: 08. Phrases: Noun, Adjective, Adverb, and Prepositional Phrases
layout: default
nav_order: 2
---

## 08. Phrases: Noun, Adjective, Adverb, and Prepositional Phrases

What are phrases?   
What makes a phrase?    
What are the components of a phrase?    

### Adjective phrases
- adjective
  - She was _popular_.
- Pre-modified by adverbs
  - Jane was _really tired_ yesterday.
- Post-modified by adverbs
  - He was not _strong enough_.
  
Basically, adjective phrase = **optional pre-modifiers + adjective + optional post-modifiers**  
  
### Adverb phrases
- Adverb
  - They sing _beautifully_.
- Pre-modified by adverbs
  - Bill walked _very slowly_.
- Post-modified by prepositional phrases
  - _Unfortunately for Jack_, the treatment came too late.
  
Basically, adverb phrase = **optional pre-modifiers + head adverb + optional post-modifiers**  

### Noun Phrases
- Nouns: defined in terms of meaning
  - Person, place, thing
- Nouns: defined by their form
  - Can be made plural and possessive

**Noun phrases are made of a head noun and others.**  

- Which one is the head noun?
1. Life
2. Back pain
3. Fires in hospitals
4. Absence from work
5. Bad attitude in children
6. Firewall security breaches
7. Itchy skin disease in the cat
8. Failure in metallic structures
9. Home owner insurance claims
10. A computer problem in my residence hall

#### Determiners in noun phrases
I saw *the* boy on *the* bus.

#### Multiple determiners in noun phrases
*his first* love  
*few other* books

#### Pre-modifiers in noun phrases
- Adjectives
- Nouns
- Phrases
  - the best solution -- Adjective
  - the really old car -- Phrases
  - the church warden -- Nouns

#### Post-modifiers in noun phrases
- Prepositional phrases
  - the beginning of the end
- Adjective phrases
  - girls fond of chocolate
- Non-finite clauses
  - the war to end all wars
- Relative clauses
  - the parcel that went astray
  
Basically, noun phrase = **optional determiners + optional pre-modifiers + head noun + optional post-modifiers**
  
### Prepositional phrases
**preposition + noun phrase**
- Is this *about my application*?
- _In this current study_, we are seeking smokers.
- I’ve lived here _since 2013_.
   
Not to be confused with the infinitive (to + verb)
- I went to the store.
  - "to" as a preposition
- I went to buy groceries.
  - "to”" as an infinitive marker
  
#### Multiple embedded prepositional phrases
e.g.: She	opened the	drawer in	the	cupboard near	the	antique	table in	the	middle of	the	room.
  
### Verb phrases
Verb phrases will be discussed in detail in the future.
- **optional auxiliaries + optional negation + optional pre-modifiers + head verb + optional post-modifier**

### Homework
[Quiz: Parts of noun phrases](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001786)  
[Quiz: Identifying prepositional phrases](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001788)  
[Quiz: Adjective, adverb, or prepositional phrase](https://canvas.iastate.edu/courses/118016/modules/items/7001789)  

### Supplement Reading
[Diagramming Supplement Part 1 (Introduction, w/ Abbreviations)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/18wTYf5A6KoJieOD7TlqrxRSuGoYsQGqy/view?usp=sharing)
